---
layout: post
title: Kindle foreign language dictionary lookups for language learning
tags:
- kindle
- gadgets
- argentina
comments: true
---
OK, this rules -- ask and you shall receive.

You can tell the Kindle to show foreign language translations, instead of
same-language definitions, with its builtin dictionary feature. This is
something I had reason to want, wondered if it were possible, and it turns out
that it already exists.

Here's the background: one of my favorite books in any language is
[Labyrinths](http://www.amazon.com/Labyrinths-Directions-Paperbook-Jorge-
Borges/dp/0811216993/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1290785837&sr=8-1), by Jorge Luis
Borges, an English translation of works originally published in Spanish as
[Ficciones](http://www.amazon.com/Labyrinths-Directions-Paperbook-Jorge-
Borges/dp/0811216993/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1290785837&sr=8-1). (OK, that's an
oversimplification -- Labyrinths is not exactly a translation of Ficciones;
both are collections of short stories, but not exactly the same set of Borges
stories. Still, Labyrinths is the preeminent English-language translation of
Borges, and it's a great collection of stories.)

I've read the English translations several times (the stories are extremely
rich and deeply layered and get better with multiple rereadings), and it's
long been a goal to eventually read them in Spanish, but I don't know Spanish.
Now, however, I'm learning Spanish; also it turns out that Labyrinths is not
available for Kindle, but Ficciones is. I figured this was a good excuse to
jump in and give it a try.

Once I started reading the stories in Spanish, I found it possible but
extremely slow going, as reading in a tentatively acquired foreign language
always is. Partly the problem is slowing down and making sure comprehension
occurs, and partly it's vocabulary. Looking up each unfamiliar word in a
separate dictionary is really slow and takes you out of the original book, but
if you skip too many unfamiliar words without understanding them, it's hard to
understand the overall writing.

Meanwhile, the Kindle has a builtin dictionary lookup feature, where you move
the cursor over any word and it shows the definition of the word (at the edge
of the screen, and you can push a button to jump to a longer definition). This
feature shows English definitions of English words, but driven by the above
need to improve my Spanish vocabulary, I started wondering if the Kindle
dictionary feature could show me Spanish -> English translations instead of
English -> English definitions.

I did a web search for this, and immediately found some questions and answers
indicating it is possible -- the technique boils down to: buy a dictionary
with the translations you want, then from the Home screen's menu go to
Settings, then from the Settings screen's menu go to Change Primary
Dictionary, and select the new dictionary. ([This process is nicely documented
here](http://blogkindle.com/dictionary/), but the dictionaries they link to
are in the wrong direction. I bought the [Merriam-Webster Spanish-English
Translation Dictionary](http://www.amazon.com/Merriam-Websters-Spanish-
English-Translation-Dictionary-
ebook/dp/B002ROKQUG/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&m=AG56TWVU5XWC2&s=digital-
text&qid=1290789984&sr=1-1) instead.)

It's not perfectly seamless -- you have to pay for a separate dictionary for
each language, buy the dictionary ahead of time, tell the Kindle to use it,
and only one dictionary is active at a time -- but still, I expect this to be
immensely helpful both for my reading of Ficciones and for my learning of
Spanish overall.

