---
layout: post
title: ! 'The perils of halfway speaking Spanish '
tags:
- travel
- argentina
comments: true
---
One of my favorite things about being in Argentina is the opportunity to learn
Spanish for real -- I'd taken a few months of classes and have that stilted
working knowledge which comes from classes which means that if I have time to
think very carefully I could maybe construct and understand correct sentences,
but at the speed of real conversation, all bets are off. So it was when we
arrived here; being surrounded by Spanish (or Castellano, the Argentinian
version), it's not quite full immersion but there's still plenty of
opportunity for learning and I can feel my brain expanding day by day. Once
you get to this point with a language, I find, it's more important to just
keep soaking it up, forward forward forward, not bothering to backtrack when
you don't understand every single word or concept in a conversation perfectly
-- if you interrupt the flow, you'll get that one discrete piece correct but
lose the bigger picture.

Many times I've had the sense that I understood everything in the conversation
up until 3-ish sentences ago, but have a much hazier picture of the most
recent bit. If we just keep talking, that window will revise itself as the
formerly most recent bit becomes clearer from context -- so at the end of a
conversation I'll have more than the gist of it, but if you interrupt at any
moment and ask exactly what we're talking about I might be confused. This
occasionally leaves room for comical misunderstandings but by and large is the
most rapid way of learning I've found.

This is all by way of excusing myself for the fact that when Javier was
driving me and Vanessa up the mountain to Glaciar Martial, where we were to
hike around the ski area for a while, and he was explaining to us how we could
return to the town of Ushuaia -- either along the road we're currently driving
on, or a trail that starts alongside the road, and here's where to find the
trail, and here's how long to budget for it, and here are some other useful
things to know when hiking around the ski area -- I didn't understand the part
about the trail being delineated with yellow trail markers, and I didn't let
it bother me that I didn't understand it.

And *this* is all by way of excusing myself for the fact that on the way down,
we easily found the trail next to the road, then, without knowing it,
immediately lost it. We continued along a nicely cleared dirt road until it
ended in a swamp, with foot tracks going ahead through the swamp and another
well-trodden foot path to the right. Avoiding the swamp, we turned right, and
headed downhill for about 50 yards where the trail abruptly petered out.
Backtracking, we decided the trail through the swamp also looked pretty well
trafficked, so off we went, but after half an hour we hadn't made it very far,
our feet were getting soaked, it was starting to rain, and this trail too was
disappearing.

At some point during all this, Vanessa -- who's more competent at Spanish
comprehension than I am, but also a lot more reluctant to admit it and act on
it -- said something about following the yellow brick road, which I took as an
allusion to the fact that we were lost in Oz, but which was actually her
wondering where to find the yellow trail markers -- which she had actually
understood in Javier's instructions.

Eventually we gave up on the swamp trail, backtracked all the way to the paved
road, and, about 5 feet from the paved road, found the extremely-obvious-in-
retrospect yellow trail markers leading off at 90 degrees to the trail we'd
been lost on. (In our defense, they were a lot easier to see in the return
direction, and were hidden by the slope in the direction we were originally
going.)

Anyway. Knowing just enough to be dangerous, indeed.

