---
layout: post
title: ! 'Travel mysteries: ok to lean your airline seat back?'
tags:
- travel
comments: true
---
I've been learning that the issues surrounding when you're allowed and
expected to recline your airline seat are a lot more complex than I'd
previously realized.

First lesson was last May on a flight from Hanoi to Seoul, on Asiana (a South
Korean airline). This was a 4 hour redeye leaving at 11:20pm and arriving at
5:20am after a 2 hour time difference -- so in Hanoi time it was from 11:20am
to 3:20am and in Seoul time it was from 1:20am to 5:20am -- pretty well the
middle of the night by any definition.

As soon as we reached cruising altitude I reclined my seat and tried to sleep„
only to be awakened about 15 minutes later by a flight attendant asking me to
sit upright so she could serve the meal. Now, first of all, I wasn't expecting
a meal on this middle-of-the-night flight and this seemed like a weird time to
eat. Second of all, on flights in the US some people sleep and others eat and
there's no assumption that by reclining your seat you're intruding on the
space behind you. Third, this less-than-4-hour period was the closest thing I
had to a bed that night, so I wanted to sleep; finally I'd just been woken in
the middle of the night and was cloudy-brained and peevish. I said no thanks
and tried to go back to the sleep, but the flight attendant was insistent:
"now is the time for eating." "OK," I replied clumsily, "but when is the time
for sleeping?" After going back and forth on this a few times, the fight
attendant said "well, if you don't want to sit upright, that's ok" in a voice
clearly implying it wasn't ok, then returned to the passengers behind me and
said something in Korean which I'm sure was an apology for foreigners who
don't know how to act. I sat there in a Walter Sobchak frame of mind ("I'm
staying here, I'm finishing my coffee") for about 5 minutes, but confused and
feeling like a jerk and outnumbered about 300 to 1, decided finally to sit up
and read since I wasn't going to sleep anyway.

Now, maybe everyone else on the flight lived in or near Seoul and was going to
go home and sleep and didn't care about sleeping on the flight; I didn't have
that option in my future -- just a 12 hour layover that was going to be
unpleasant without sleep. But whatever. I chalked this up to strange local
customs I didn't understand, and went on with life, until…

Then this week we flew from Salta (northwest Argentina) to Buenos Aires on a
flight leaving at 6:30am, also a time where I'd rather sleep than eat airline
food. Again, I reclined my seat as soon as allowed and went to sleep. This
time the flight attendant didn't wake me, and I was asleep so I didn't notice,
but Vanessa said the passengers behind us were complaining and getting what
looked like apologetic shrugs about clueless foreigners from the flight
attendant.

So -- anyone else have experiences like this or know what the various customs
and expectations are around the world?

