---
layout: post
title: iPhone 3G sacrificed to gods of Machu Picchu
tags:
- gadgets
- travel
- peru
---
Vanessa and I visited Machu Picchu yesterday and today; beyond visiting the
ruins of the Inca citadel itself, we also climbed the higher of the two
surrounding peaks, Monta√±a Machu Picchu.

While at the top, we sat down to rest and enjoy the view for a while; Vanessa
was drawing and I was reading, leaned up against a convenient boulder. I
noticed but didn't fully appreciate that there was a smallish hole under the
boulder on which I was leaning, leading to a largish cavern, about which more
later.

Here's the "before" setup: note iPhone already starting to crawl out of left
pants pocket.

![Before
sacrifice](http://farm6.static.flickr.com/5167/5262183014_9382f249cf_z.jpg)

To make a long story short, as I stood up to leave, the iPhone launched itself
out of my pocket, well, really, just slid a few inches, then hung on the
surface of the ground for maybe a fraction of a second -- these things always
happen in slow motion -- as Vanessa and I, still in slow motion, perceived:
iPhone on ground, proximate hole in ground, iPhone continuing to slide toward
hole, Matt's hand grabbing madly at where the iPhone had just been fractions
of a second before, iPhone entering hole, iPhone swallowed by hole -- then
there remained just the peaceful gaping maw of hole.

I mean, it could have gone very differently, but it didn't, and suddenly the
phone was gone, down the hole. I looked down the hole and it was visible, but
way out of reach -- maybe 4 feet down -- possibly retrievable with a fishing
net or one of those grab-it-for-me things elderly people use, but we had
neither, we're a couple hour hike from even a modicum of civilization, and it
was starting to rain. I tried to fashion a net out of the hood of my raincoat
and a stick Vanessa found, but squandered my one chance, knocking the phone
farther down and out of reach.

Here's the "after" scenario: note me sticking as much of my head and one
shoulder as will (not much) fit through the hole under the rock, floundering
around trying to reach the phone.

![After
sacrifice](http://farm6.static.flickr.com/5162/5262183112_114dcf5a7d_z.jpg)

Anyway, hopefully this is not a major international environmental disaster --
littering in a national park, as it were -- we did try pretty hard to get it
back, but without advanced technology or a trained monkey, it wasn't
happening. As for the phone, I'm sorry to see it go, but it was already pretty
severely injured -- due to a previous accident involving water, the vibrating
ringer and internal speaker were broken, meaning it worked great as an iPod
Touch but poorly as an actual phone handset; also the wi-fi radio range was
severely compromised, probably by my repair efforts when drying it from said
unfortunate water accident -- suffice it to say this was already on its last
legs. RIP. With luck, it may make an interesting archaeological find for
someone in the future.

