---
layout: post
title: Apple iOS devices and their crazy dependency on iTunes
tags:
- mobile
- gadgets
- apple
comments: true
---
I just bought a new iPod Touch to replace[ the iPhone 3G I sacrificed to the
gods of Machu Picchu](http://blog.metamatt.com/blog/2010/12/03/iphone-3g-
sacrificed-to-gods-of-machu-picchu/).

I took it out of the packaging, turned it on, and found: it immediately
demanded that I connect it to iTunes, and was entirely useless until I did so.

This is ostensibly so that I can restore it from a backup of an existing iOS
device if I'm upgrading from an older one, and also so that I can sync music
and videos and apps and stuff to it, and also so that it gets backed up.

Still, without ever syncing music etc. from a computer, it's useful purely
over the (wi-fi) network connection; I wanted to add my email and iTunes App
Store credentials and then I'd be able to download apps, check email, and
browse the web. Or, I should say, *would* be useful for all this if I didn't
have to go find a computer and plug it in just to do nothing.

(Plenty of other similar devices -- Palm Pre, Amazon Kindle, and, I presume
though I don't own any, Android phones -- manage to be useful out of the box
and over the air without ever needing to connect to a computer, though of
course you can do this optionally if you want to, up front or later, to sync
media.)

To make things worse, I'm not home; I'm visiting my sister and her family. So
I had to borrow her computer just to activate my iPod Touch. Even though
iTunes asked me what iTunes account to use to register the device -- it was
signed in as her, and I signed out and signed back in as myself -- it used my
account only for the registration step, but on the iPod Touch itself, it went
ahead and configured her iTunes account, which I had to undo later.

I'm also somewhat dreading that when I do get home, and want to add music to
this iPod, I'll have to sync it with a computer I actually own, and that doing
so will make me have to start over with all the things I did today -- adding
email accounts, installing apps, and then configuring my credentials for these
apps. I hope not.

