---
layout: post
title: ! 'Amazon reviews in Kindle store: sorting from oldest to newest is not helpful '
tags:
- amazon
- kindle
- gadgets
---
If you use the Kindle device itself to shop in the Kindle store, you can
browse and search for books, and view reviews, but: the reviews are sorted by
time, ascending chronologically. There's no way I can find to change this and
it's painful to scroll through more than a few (they're presented 3 per
screen, and there's no way to jump around in the list), so in practice you
only ever end up looking at the first few reviews in the list, which means the
first few reviews posted.

There are some really egregious examples of this. For
[Dune](http://www.amazon.com/Dune-40th-Anniversary-Edition-
ebook/dp/B001F0WXY0/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&m=AG56TWVU5XWC2&s=digital-
text&qid=1290353113&sr=1-1), the reviews start in 1996, and even with a lot of
clicking and waiting, my patience was exhausted before I got out of 1996. For
the Lonely Planet  guidebook to Chile, the first reviews you see castigate the
1999 edition, but here in 2010, with the book having been revised several
times since then, who knows how reflective that is of the current edition.
(Note that if you follow the Dune link on the web, here, you get the real
Amazon storefront which shows reviews sorted by "most helpful", very unlike
the Kindle result. That is, I can't demonstrate the problem I'm talking about
by linking to Amazon's website, because the website doesn't have this problem.
Moreover, the Amazon website doesn't even show the same search result for the
Lonely Planet Chile guidebook I bought, so I can't link to that at all.)

(Aside: my two examples are also [additional examples of times when combining
reviews for multiple editions of a product is not
helpful](http://blog.metamatt.com/blog/2010/10/21/amazon-review-format-
combining-can-be-dangerous/). The current edition of Dune, and the one I
bought, is the "40th anniversary edition" printed in 2005, so reviews from
1996 have only partial applicability to this edition. And the guidebook
problem is obvious, since new editions aren't just reprints with typo fixes,
they're ostensibly redone entirely.)

It would be better if they sorted reverse-chronologically, or sorted most-
helpful-first, or even random if they don't want the-rich-get-richer -- which
is a pretty bad problem with the current order.  But the current order is
pretty much the worst possible one.

