---
layout: post
title: My experience with the big 4 cell networks in the US (or, why I use Sprint)
tags:
- mobile
comments: true
---
Over the past 12 years I've been a customer of Sprint, T-Mobile and
Cingular/AT&T for wireless service in the US, and from this, I have a simple
view of what you get from each one. During that time I've lived in the San
Francisco Bay Area and traveled pretty extensively in cities on both coasts
and in the rural Pacific Northwest, so that's what my coverage comments will
be based on.

(I've never been a Verizon customer, but it's widely agreed that their service
is both good and expensive; it's easy to verify their prices are on the high
end, and friends and family who use their service like the quality, so I'll
repeat that viewpoint).

Summary: Sprint and T-Mobile are cheap; AT&T and Verizon are expensive; Sprint
and Verizon have good coverage; AT&T and T-Mobile have weak coverage; that
means Sprint is cheap and good, Verizon is expensive and good, T-Mobile is
cheap and weak, and AT&T is expensive and weak.

Sprint, in 7 years of use, has always been the cheapest for the level of
service I get, and it's always worked fine for me. Sure, there are rural areas
where they don't have coverage, but in my experience their coverage is wider
than T-Mobile and equal to AT&T, and anywhere they don't have coverage, you
can roam for free on Verizon. Voice quality has been good; usually with even 1
bar of signal strength conversations work fine. Sprint often gets dismissed as
having bad customer service, but that hasn't been my experience; also, in my
view, the best customer service is the one you have to deal with the least,
and I didn't often have a need to call them.

T-Mobile was priced about the same as Sprint, but their coverage was notably
worse, both in the rural Pacific Northwest, and in urban San Francisco. I had
no real complaints in 2 years as a T-Mobile customer other than lack of signal
coverage in areas that mattered to me; that's when I jumped ship to Cingular,
since I could bring along my existing GSM phone.

AT&T worked OK (better than T-Mobile, no better than Sprint) with the older
phone I brought over from T-Mobile, until I got an iPhone in 2007. That
started 2 years of frustration, ultimately leading me to decide that the GSM
networks in the US haven't kept up in terms of network quality, and bringing
me back to Sprint. In 2 years of iPhone use, I had daily experiences with
dropped calls, incoming calls that went straight to voicemail, and garbled
voice during calls that went through, all of this often with the phone
reporting 4 or 5 bars of signal strength. Voice calls weren't the only
problem; often I'd take my phone out to look up a map or kill a few minutes
reading mail or the web, and be unable to do so, so I take issue with the
general assumption that the iPhone is a bad phone but great for everything
else and so great for modern people who don't care about voice calls -- those
people probably expect reliable wireless data, and aren't getting it. One
observation I made during this time was that while every carrier's coverage
has dead spots (they even have maps of this!), dead spots in space are pretty
easy to route around -- you know where they are, and you can avoid them. But
AT&T's network is the only one I've seen where the signal quality varies
hugely in time as well, that is, where you could have perfect signal quality
at one time, and 5 minutes later in the same spot, no usable signal at all.
For me, signal quality that varies in time is far more frustrating than signal
quality that varies in space.

(There's plenty of agreement on AT&T's dismal service quality, especially in
cities such as New York and San Francisco, and plenty of speculation on why --
maybe it's the iPhone itself that's buggy, maybe there are simply too many
users on the network -- I just know that the 2 different iPhones I had were
not reliable for either voice or data use in the US, and they both worked a
lot better overseas on other networks once I unlocked them.)

So of the 3 networks I've tried, only Sprint was cheap and good; that for me
is a compelling combination and brought me back to them.

