---
layout: post
title: Kindle subscription content is not transferable between devices
tags:
- amazon
- kindle
- gadgets
- drm
comments: true
---
If you subscribe to a periodical on Kindle, each issue of the periodical can
only be viewed on one Kindle device, ever.

In some ways, Amazon makes this pretty obvious up front, but in other aspects,
not at all.

First, unlike Kindle book content, periodical content has a designated device,
and only downloads to that device, and once one Kindle device has downloaded
one issue, other Kindle devices can't. This is pretty clear in the purchasing
UI, e.g. [here for The Atlantic](http://www.amazon.com/The-
Atlantic/dp/B000IMVNQU), and click "how subscriptions work" near the Subscribe
button.

Second, also unlike Kindle book content, periodical content is only available
on real Kindle devices, not the software app for Windows, Mac OS, iPhone,
Android, etc. (This is supposed to change soon.)

Third, and this is the part that I find non-obvious, once a given Kindle
downloads an issue from a subscription, it can't be transfered to another
Kindle. This means that if you break, or lose, or sell, your Kindle, and buy
another one, all your old subscription issues are gone. I find this annoying
because I didn't know this when I subscribed -- I thought I was buying
something to keep as long as I wanted, and of course an individual Kindle
device isn't going to last forever.

Plus, I can't find anywhere that this limitation is documented publicly
(unless you count the terse "Issues are only available for download to one
Kindle" statement as covering this case, which I don't). I found out when I
broke my Kindle and bought another one -- Amazon makes it easy to transfer the
subscription itself to the new Kindle device, so future issues show up on the
new device, but it said nothing about the old issues. I then asked Kindle
customer support how I could transfer the old issues I paid for, and they said
I can't. Since then, I've asked them 3 times if they can point to a public web
page with a policy statement on this, and every time they just answer that old
subscription content can't be transfered.

I suspect this comes down to license revocation, and that they never built a
revocation capability into their DRM technology, and this is just another one
of the lame facts of life about DRM. It's not the first time that Amazon's
Kindle DRM in particular has reminded people that you're not really buying
content, you're just licensing it, and [the licensing party has undue control
over what they've licensed you](http://www.informationweek.com/news/personal_t
ech/drm/showArticle.jhtml?articleID=218501227).

