---
layout: post
title: ! 'Trelew, Rawson, Punta Tombo: dolphins and penguins'
tags:
- travel
- argentina
---
We're in coastal Patagonia with the hopes of seeing penguins, dolphins, and
whales -- all of which should be around this time of year. There are two big
wildlife reserves here -- Peninsula Valdes to the north (known for whales and
elephant seals) and Punta Tombo to the south (the world's largest colonly of
Magellanic Penguins).Â We've also been told there are good dolphin-watching
opportunities nearby, and we should try to combine this into our trip to the
penguin reserve.

Short story for those just interested in the animals: we saw the penguins and
dolphins and both were endearing. The dolphins we saw are Commerson's
dolphins, which are tiny, live here year around, and are called "toninas" by
the Argentinians; other larger dolphin species ("delfines") show up in the
summer but aren't here yet. The toninas were easy to spot, and obligingly
playful, swimming near our boat, and surfing the bow waves from our and other
boats. The penguins in the Punta Tombo colony are Magellanic penguins, about 2
feet tall, fairly lazy, and fairly willing to ignore humans traipsing through
their nesting areas. We spent a few hours watching them, sleeping in their
nests, standing up and stretching and standing still for 10s of minutes at a
time, going through a wake-up grooming ritual that looks a lot like humans
brushing their teeth -- hey, penguins are easy to anthropomorphize -- and
occasionally waddling around.

Longer story with advice for anyone who might be trying this trip themselves:

The guidebooks we're using are both heavily biased towards using Puerto Madryn
as a base for visiting these areas, but we decided to stay in Trelew first,
for three reasons: it's closer to the penguin reserve, it's got the airport
we're flying into, and being less recommended by guidebooks it'll be less full
of guidebook-toting tourists.

So, then, here we are in Trelew trying to figure out how best to visit Punta
Tombo, but this turns out to be not incredibly obvious, either from guidebook
advice or internet searches (hmm, maybe this is why the guidebooks advise
going to Puerto Madryn).

It seems we have 3 basic options: a guided tour package, a taxi hired for the
day, or renting a car and going by ourselves. The taxi that picked us up from
the airport mentioned they do all-day tours to Punta Tombo for a fixed price
of AR$480, so that's our starting point.

Looking for tours, it seems like most of what's available starts in Puerto
Madryn and not Trelew. Using guidebook advice, we find one company starting in
Trelew but they're not running a tour today. Finally our hotel front desk
finds one; it's AR$180 per person, and visits the penguin reserve, Gaiman for
Welsh tea, and the dinosaur museum. So a group tour: nearly the same price,
takes us other places we didn't want to go, doesn't visit the dolphins, and
leaves only about 1 hour with the penguins.

We ruled out renting a car because I didn't feel like driving all day.

That left us back with the taxi option, and since now we know it doesn't cost
that much more than a package tour (for 2 people -- and for 3 or 4 people, it
would actually be cheaper), plus lets us go at our own pace, stay with the
penguins as long as we want, and work the dolphins into the itinerary too,
it's the clear winner.

Next up: bus to Puerto Madryn, rent a car, and drive into Peninsula Valdes to
see the whales and elephant seals.

