---
layout: post
title: Argentine national parks are expensive
tags:
- travel
- argentina
---
Argentine national parks are really expensive for foreigners. Admission tends
to be something like $75, per person, per day -- unlike in the US where
national park admission is usually good for an entire vehicle for a week. (If
you aren't familiar with Argentine currency, here's a crash course: the unit
of currency is the peso, and there are currently about 4 Argentine pesos to
the US dollar. The peso symbol is the $, so to avoid confusion, I'll prefix
the $ symbol with the country code, either AR$ for pesos or US$ for US
dollars.)

Vanessa and I have visited 3 different national parks so far - Parque Nacional
Iguazu, Parque Nacional Tierra del Fuego and Parque Nacional de los Glaciares.
We visited each park for 2 days, and since there are 2 of us, and all of the
admission fees are per person per day, that means we had to buy 4 tickets --
conveniently matching the 4-to-1 ratio between pesos and dollars. Thus,
admission to Glaciares is AR$75 for a single ticket, but for the two of us to
visit on two consecutive days it cost us US$75.

Iguazu was also AR$75 per person per day, or US$75 for our 2-day visit, and
Tierra del Fuego was AR$65 per person per day, or US$65 for our 2-day visit.

Further: Argentine national parks have 3 different prices depending on where
you're from -- residents of the same province as the park pay the least, other
Argentinians pay slightly more, and foreigners pay a lot more. That seems
somewhat fair since (a) foreigners don't pay taxes and (b) they mostly come
from more expensive or richer countries.

But, this still stings in comparison to the US: the less visited parks cost
something like US$10, and the most popular and expensive (say Yellowstone)
something like US$25. However, that gets your whole family in for a week. And
there's an all-access pass good for all national parks for a year (this used
to be known as the Golden Eagle pass; now it's called Access), which is US$80.
That's sounding like a better and better deal compared to Argentina, and as
far as I know it's available to foreigners as well.

(Maybe there's some all-access pass for Argentine parks that I don't know
about? As it stands, we've racked up US$215 in park admission fees in just 2
weeks!)

