---
layout: post
title: Dunes within dunes
tags: 
---
I just reread the first 3 Dune books (Dune, Dune Messiah, Children of Dune).
Consistent with my memory from the 1st reading, the first is awesome and the
second one much weaker. The author's son, Brian Herbert, wrote an afterword to
the first book and introductions to the second in third, and in all three of
these he finds it necessary to defend the second book, but, in my opinion, not
for the right reasons -- what he apologizes for is the tearing down of the
hero, which I didn't mind. Â What's wrong with the second book is that it just
doesn't have the depth of intrigue or scope or carefulness that makes the
first so epic. It's like the actual writing fell victim to trying to prove a
point. Maybe this echoes an ironic meta-consistency with the idea that heroes
are fallible, but it's not actually good for the book.

It's really a matter of deftness -- books one and three hint subtly at things
beyond what's stated, leaving much to the imagination and inspiring the
reader, while book two generally describes things over-plainly, coming off
stilted, and not taking advantage of the overall air of mystery.

The third book, on the whole, is a return to the layered intrigue and epic
scale that made the first book so strong.

Side note: I read all of these on Kindle, and the Kindle rendition of the
first book is horrible -- chock full of typos and formatting errors. This is
especially ironic given that the first book has been reissued as a vaunted
"40th anniversary edition" and costs more; the sequels haven't been given the
"reissue-with-lots-of-formatting-errors" treatment, and are both cheaper to
purchase and a lot easier to read. More on this later.

