---
layout: post
title: iOS simplified multitasking isn't a panacea
tags:
- apple
- gadgets
- software
comments: true
---
iOS was born without support for multitasking, and when competing smartphone
OSes (especially WebOS and Android) added it, it was occasionally mocked for
the complexity it adds and the problems this can cause -- the fact that a top
Android app is a task killer was widely used to mock the whole Android
platform, and it's certainly frustrating under WebOS when you're told you have
too many cards open and need to throw some away before you can do anything
new.

Problems iOS users don't have, true. On the other hand, at least these OSes
(a) let you run multiple tasks if you want to, and (b) have explicit support
for ending tasks you no longer want for whatever reason. (And there are
various reasons to want this: perhaps you don't want it using resources,
perhaps you want it to restart from its default launch state, perhaps you just
don't want it cluttering up your screen.)

Recently I got a new iPod Touch and it's my first experience both with iOS 4
and with an iOS device with increased memory -- in short, now I can try out
the multitasking features that Apple added in iOS 4. At first blush, I really
like it; it's easy to switch between recently used apps and recently used apps
seem to launch more quickly than they do from a cold start; I think this is a
good improvement to the platform.

However, in the next week, I've seen at least 2 occasions where apps got in a
bad state, and going back to the home screen and relaunching the app didn't
fix it (whereas it would have in iOS versions predating multitasking). Sure,
these were app bugs and not platform bugs, but I didn't know a way to actually
quit and restart the app, short of rebooting the whole iPod, or launching a
bunch of other apps in quick succession until it magically pages out the
offending app so the next time I launch it it's a clean launch (this is what I
did, and it eventually worked).

While writing this post, I looked around a little and it turns out iOS 4 does
have a built in task killer -- double-tap Home to bring up the multitasking
tray with icons for recently used apps, then click and hold on one of these
until it wiggles and it'll have a "-" badge which will remove it from the
recently-used tray and, presumably, actually kill it.Â (Though I still don't
know how to tell which of the many icons that show up in iOS's multitasking
tray -- if I scroll to the right, it seems to be a most-recently-used list of
every app I've ever launched -- is actually running.)

So iOS 4 is both more powerful and complex than I'd realized, but also, it's
achieved parity with the oft-mocked Android multitasking feature in both
directions -- now it has multitasking, but now it needs and has a task killer.

I find I still prefer WebOS's more explicit interface to multitasking.

