---
layout: post
title: State of the last-mile internet connection, year 2003
tags:
- dsl
- last-mile
- network
---
In 2003 when I moved to San Francisco, I didn't look around too hard but just
signed up for the [Speakeasy DSL connection that I had wanted
before](http://blog.metamatt.com/blog/2011/03/31/state-of-the-last-mile-
internet-connection-year-2001/), and which was actually available at my new
address.

I kept that connection for 5 years until I moved in 2008, and it worked out
pretty well, though the speed was more impressive for 2003 than for 2008. Said
speed: 6mbps down, 768kbps up, the fastest I've seen deployed in the US for
standard ADSL (not ADSL2+).

The good: the connection was reliable; Speakeasy was easy to deal with; their
tech support people were clueful; their policies were customer-friendly (no
caps, no restrictions on server hosting or sharing my network with others);
pricing was transparent and up-front. (Some of these shouldn't even count as
benefits, but compared to a lot of the competition, they are, so I list them.)

The bad: it was expensive ($116/month for "naked" DSL with a static IP and no
phone line); no faster speeds were available. (They eventually rolled out a
15mbps ADSL2 service that would reach me, but the cost was really high -- over
$200/month.)

When I first moved in and got this service, I chose it because it was the
fastest DSL connection available, I'd heard bad rumors about cable modems not
reaching their advertised speed because of neighbor traffic (which I've since
found to be untrue, but that's a story for another time), and I wanted to deal
with a company whose priority was the data network, not propping up an aging
TV or telephone business. I was pretty happy with this over the years, but by
2008, I probably would have bailed on DSL and gone to cable internet even if I
hadn't moved.

(Note: all of the Speakeasy experiences described here were true at the time,
before Speakeasy was acquired by Megapath. While I haven't been a customer
since, I don't think all of these advantages are true any more; namely, the
DSL lines have usage caps and it's no longer possible to get a straightforward
price quote from their web page. RIP, customer-friendly policies.)

