---
layout: post
title: State of the last-mile internet connection, year 2001
tags:
- dsl
- network
- last-mile
---
In 2001 I lived in residential Los Altos Hills in a small rental cottage on
the edge of a larger piece of property. Other than that tiny cottage, it's a
pretty expensive neighborhood these days, but also pretty remote, and again
the only available last-mile Internet connection was DSL, and with a pretty
long loop length at that.

I'd heard good things about Speakeasy, so I filled out their sign-up page,
gave them my address, and their system did whatever lookups it does and
decided it could serve me, so I signed up and scheduled an install. Then just
before the install date a few days later, I got a message from them saying
(paraphrased) "Er, we know we offered you you a nice fast ADSL connections for
$50/month, but it turns out the PacBell "wiring" connecting your house to the
phone network is actually just tin cans and string, or possibly rusty piano
wire, and in any case is useless for ADSL… but would you be happy with SDSL,
144kbits in each direction, for $200/month?"

No, not really, I wouldn't be.

Actually, I don't have to paraphrase, because I still have the email from
Speakeasy:

> Your order has been canceled due to pair gain on the line and needs to be
downgraded to 144k IDSL. Pair Gain is the multiplexing of a certain number of
phone conversations (signals) over a limited number of facilities. Basically
you have a couple numbers, and so does your neighbor, but guess what? You both
use the same CO facilities to talk on. Very bad for DSL.  If you are still
interested in service, please see[[http://www.speakeasy.net/pricing/](http://w
ww.speakeasy.net/pricing/)](http://www.speakeasy.net/pricing/) for the 144k
IDSL speed and it's price difference from the service you originally
requested.

They couldn't offer any way to get my lines upgraded; just the observation
that the wiring wouldn't sustain a modern ADSL connection and changes to the
wiring were out of their hands.

Long story short: I signed up for PacBell DSL service, and they delivered it
with no drama. It was pretty much the same price and speed as what Speakeasy
was offering but found themselves unable to deliver.

Over the same wires, right? Or maybe not. My theory is that PacBell had bad
and good wires running to my neighborhood, and they were happy to switch their
own DSL customers over to new shiny wires but relegate Covad/Speakeasy
customers to the old rotten wires.

(As an aside, looking through other emails from the same time frame, I'm
amused to see that before giving up and going with PacBell, I also tried
signing up for two different services from Sprint which I'd forgotten existed
-- "[Sprint Broadband Direct](http://www.dslreports.com/shownews/Sprint-
Broadband-Direct-Goes-Offline-July-31-94556)" which was a 1.5mbps line-of-
sight wireless link, and "[Sprint
ION](http://www.networkworld.com/archive/2001/126613_10-22-2001.html)" which
was some ill-fated ATM-over-DSL technology that was heavily touted for a short
period but was never actually available in my area.)

