---
layout: post
title: ! 're: browser ui'
tags: 
comments: true
---
[puntium](http://puntium.tumblr.com/post/3923741525):

> Dear browser designers. Please find a way to put my bookmarks bar next to my
URL bar.

>

> Increasingly, the tab bar is becoming the equivalent of the taskbar, with
each app taking up a slot. So IE9-ish combining of URL and tab bar seems
constraining.

>

> What is easier to constrain, is the layout of my bookmark bar. Being able to
put that up by my URL input bar makes a lot of sense. They’re both
navigational, and both are right now bigger than they need to be.

Seems reasonable. I barely use bookmarks and often turn off that bar entirely,
so I don't really care, but certainly the tab bar needs all the space I can
give it, the address bar is also important, and I agree the bookmark bar is
the place to regain vertical space.

Something's funny here though -- IE4 could do what you asked (IE4 was also a
new version of the Windows shell, basically, and it introduced the rebar
control, and this was before tabs but each of address/bookmarks/some other
stuff was its own toolbar, each of which could be dragged around in the rebar,
sharing rows or not, and I typically would dock the bookmarks toolbar at the
right end of the address bar, so they'd share a row). Too bad this ability got
lost in the sands of time.

Actually it's worth thinking back on what the main browser UI elements have
been, over time, besides the content -- in 1997 it was menu bar, address bar,
control buttons for back/forward/home/stop/reload/maybe some other stuff, and
bookmarks. Since then we gained a search box and tabs, then lost most of the
title bar and (except for on Mac OS) the menu bar, and now we're trending
towards simplifying the control buttons to just back/forward/reload+stop, and
merging the search box with the address bar.

