---
layout: post
title: SF 1/2 marathon challenge
tags:
- running
comments: true
---
I'm [planning to run the NYC Marathon in
November](http://blog.metamatt.com/blog/2011/07/26/nyc-marathon/), as
described earlier.

I'm also going to run the first half of the SF Marathon this coming Sunday.

If you're interested in helping support my donation campaign for the NYC
Marathon, I'd like to propose a fun challenge based on how I do in the 1/2
marathon this weekend.

I've run this 1/2 marathon before, 3 years ago, and finished in 1 hour 52
minutes -- just a little faster than a 9-minute-per-mile pace. My training
goal for this time is an 8:00-per-mile pace (1 hour 45 minutes overall), and
my last couple training runs were at about 8:05 per mile. But I think I can do
it faster.

I'd be happy with an 8:00 pace -- substantially faster than my current record
for this race -- but even happier with 7:40 (just over 1 hour 40 minutes
total). Want to bet I can't do it? I'll bet I can run 7:40 miles and you bet I
can't run faster than 8:00 miles and we'll both donate to the MMRF based on
the difference.

So. If you'd like to take this challenge, and challenge me to run faster than
8:00 miles this weekend, let me know and give me a dollar amount per second.
I'll promise to donate that amount for every second slower than 7:40 I run
(average pace), and you promise to donate that amount for every second faster
than 8:00 I run.

Example: you bet me $5 per second, and I finish with an average of 7:45. You
donate $75, and I donate $25. Of course, if I finish with an average of 7:55,
you donate $25 and I donate $75.

I chose these times because it'll push me to run a little faster than
otherwise, and it stands a good chance of raising some money for the MMRF (as
opposed to, say, if I just bet you over/under 8:00, then there's no
disincentive to run slower and they get less money).

Of course, if you'd like to make a normal less complicated donation to the
MMRF in support of my marathon bid, that's welcome too, and [my fundraising
page is here](http://www.active.com/donate/2011mmrfNYC/NYFULLMGinzton).

But if this complicated challenge sounds fun and/or you want to make me sweat
more, please contact me (email, comments here, comments on Facebook, carrier
pigeonâ€¦) with your bet amount.

