---
layout: post
title: How much can the Kindle Fire improve with software updates?
tags:
- gadgets
- amazon
- kindle
comments: true
---
I wrote a [semi-positive mini-review of the Kindle
Fire](http://blog.metamatt.com/blog/2011/11/17/kindle-fire-first-impressions/)
this morning.

Then I read [Marco Arment's rather scathing "human
review"](http://www.marco.org/2011/11/17/kindle-fire-review), and wondered:
wait a minute, if it's that bad, should I return it, and wait for a better
version (or save my money if no better version materializes)?

The thing is, I saw most of the same things he did and had most of the same
complaints; I just expect Amazon to fix them. Marco sees the glass half-empty;
I see it half-full; maybe I'm too much of an optimist. I understand that it's
smarter to buy something for or judge something on its current capabilities,
not ones that may or may not materialize in the future. Still, it seems worth
considering how much better the current generation hardware might be able to
get with software updates.

Most of the complaints centered around speed and touch interaction. And those
are legitimate -- lots of taps are ignored; lots of taps are interpreted as
small drags from nowhere to nowhere; scrolling is chunky and jerky; it's at
best annoying and far from a premium experience. For goodness sake, the orange
pointed stripe that you drag to unlock the device, every time you want to wake
it from sleep, doesn't drag smoothly -- it's the first thing you see; how hard
is it to get that right? Still, if Amazon cares -- and I hope they do -- they
should be able to fix this.

So will they (fix it)? What's the problem here, anyway? [The hardware should
be up to the task](http://www.anandtech.com/show/5117/amazon-kindle-fire-tore-
down-has-512mb-of-ram) --[ TI OMAP 4430
SOC](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Texas_Instruments_OMAP#OMAP_4) with two
gigahertz CPU cores on Cortex A9 architecture and PowerVR SGX540 GPU, 512MB of
RAM. That compares favorably with this year's Apple devices based on the A5
SOC (iPad 2, iPhone 4S: two comparable CPU cores and a somewhat newer GPU
core) and very favorably with last year's Apple devices based on the A4 SOC
(iPhone 4 and 4th-generation iPod Touch: one comparable CPU core and a
somewhat older GPU core). I heard that [specs are
dead](http://daringfireball.net/linked/2011/11/14/siegler-specs), but at least
this establishes a baseline. And note that at the Kindle Fire's 1024x600
screen resolution, it's pushing the exact same number of pixels as the 960x640
retina display in the iPhone 4 and 4S. So assuming they can figure out how to
effectively leverage the CPUs and GPU -- I don't know how good Android is at
this, and I don't know what shortcuts Amazon took in forking Android, and so
on -- you'd think they should be able to get iPhone 4S-like performance out of
this. At the very least they should be able to compete with the 4th-generation
iPod Touch (which is a year old and the same price). The point is that Amazon
and Apple (and everyone else too) are using similar guts, with similar-
architecture ARM CPU cores and PowerVR GPU cores. Right now, the iPod Touch is
night and day more responsive. Amazon, get cracking.

(I've owned the previous 2 generations of e-ink Kindle and Amazon delivered
significant software updates to these long after purchase; that gives me
reason to be hopeful the same applies to the Kindle Fire.)

Some of the complaints were about missing physical buttons -- hardware volume
buttons would be nice, a dedicated home button would be nice, and there's no
way to fix those problems in software. (The headphone complaints are also
legitimate; the headphone jack location is obviously not patchable in
software; the popping might be; however I don't really care, because the iPod
has so won the music race that I don't have any desire to use the Kindle Fire
for music. I do find it notable that pretty much every non-Apple multifunction
device that *can* play music takes it so unseriously that they have popping
problems like this; that's par for the course with old and new Palm
smartphones tooâ€¦ oh well.)

What this boils down to is this: if Amazon can wring decent performance out of
the hardware, and pay some real attention to nitpicky details about the touch
interaction, about half of Marco's (and my) complaints should go away. I see
no reason this is impossible to fix with the current hardware. However, if
they also decide to yield to common sense and add hardware home and volume
buttons, the first-generation units will forever feel lacking by comparison.

I'll close with a final note on why I'm willing to give the Kindle Fire some
slack. I'm not trying to compare the Kindle Fire and iPad or argue the Kindle
Fire kills or replaces anything else, much less the iPad. But I do think the
Kindle Fire has the right guts to deliver a much better experience than it
does today, and is fixable in software if Amazon has the will to improve it.
I'm also intrigued that there's finally an Android competitor to the iPod
Touch -- decent hardware sold contract-free and unsubsidized for an honest
$200. (Incidentally, that's something [John Gruber called out for
before](http://daringfireball.net/2010/11/apples_pricing_advantage).) The big
difference between the Kindle Fire and the iPod Touch, other than the
operating system (and the responsiveness and app ecosystem that put Apple way
ahead on the software side) is obviously the size; I'm not going to get into
the screen size argument, other than to point out that anything that doesn't
fit in a pocket is clearly less portable than anything that does, and that
size imposes so many tradeoffs there's no one perfect size. Pick the one that
works for you.

Given that the $200 Android-based iPod Touch competitor now exists, I'm
interested to see what happens with the app ecosystem. I think it could be a
big gaming success, the way the iPod Touch has been, for example.

If Amazon can endow it with a major dose of missing snappiness, that is.

