---
layout: post
title: Nest "C" wire update
tags:
- nest
- thermostats
- gadgets
---
My [Nest thermostat review](http://blog.metamatt.com/blog/2012/01/20/nest-
learning-thermostat-review/) complained about up-front lack of obviousness
about "C" wire compatibility issues, and Nest support [replied with a
tweet](https://twitter.com/#!/nest/status/160464579711877120) saying

> We've updated the compatibility tool so there's a note about C wire, but
you're right - it could be clearer.

I took a trip back through the compatibility wizard, and (unless there are
more changes coming) it's there but it's still not obvious.

First, I tell it what I've got:

![](http://farm8.staticflickr.com/7001/6733277723_e2c7b691a7_z.jpg)

Then, it tells me what to expect:

![](http://farm8.staticflickr.com/7167/6733277795_b182cdd286_z.jpg)

I'm compatible, no reservations, it says. Unless I click through the "[Learn
more](http://support.nest.com/customer/portal/articles/285077)" link, which
from the context sounds like it's going to help me decide whether I can
install it without help, not whether it's compatible with my wiring. That link
goes to a "[Does Nest need a common
wire?](http://support.nest.com/customer/portal/articles/285077)" article,
which has some useful information, including recognition of the possible
problem, a suggestion to do what I did (turn another wire into a C wire if
possible), and a link to [even more
details](http://support.nest.com/customer/portal/articles/197951-when-nest-
needs-a-common-wire).

That's the right information, but I wouldn't expect to find it hidden behind
that "Learn more" link, and I still think anyone who clicks through the
compatibility wizard without a C wire should see it. Maybe these problems are
rarer than my small sample size indicates, but on the other hand, this "power
stealing" problem doesn't seem like an easy one.

C'mon, Nest — I like the product, and now that I've got mine working, I expect
to remain a happy customer. But for an issue this subtle and important, I
think you'd do well to err on the side of caution.

