---
layout: post
title: Tablet size, and implications for portability and purpose
tags:
- tablets
- gadgets
- apple
- ipad
- google
- nexus
- android
---
Apple [pretty much owns the tablet
market](https://www.google.com/search?q=%22tablet+market%22+%22ipad+market%22)
[today with the 10" iPad](http://thenextweb.com/apple/2012/08/10/this-people-
mean-say-ipad-dominating/), but the [Nexus 7](http://www.google.com/nexus/#/7)
[is here and good](http://speirs.org/blog/2012/8/2/thoughts-on-the-google-
nexus-7.html) (in my opinion, the first viable answer to "why buy this instead
of an iPad"), and meanwhile, rumors of a 7-ish-inch "iPad Mini" or "iPad Air"
are [heating](http://daringfireball.net/2012/07/this_ipad_mini_thing)
[up](http://daringfireball.net/2012/08/ipad_mini_even_througher).

My family has both a Nexus 7 and an iPad, and I find myself using the Nexus 7
more than the iPad, for four reasons. This makes me think that the iPad Mini
rumors are likely true. In a nutshell, while a 7" tablet can't do everything a
10" tablet can do, the 7" tablet _can_ do the things where I'd choose a tablet
over a laptop or desktop, and it can often do those things better than the 10"
tablet.

First, the reasons that limit what I do on a tablet vs a laptop or desktop:

1) the iPad (like all iOS and Android devices) [doesn't have user accounts,
yet my wife and I share the iPad](http://lifehacker.com/5934539/the-tablet-
problem), and I mostly leave it lying around the house. So I haven't given it
credentials for all the individual apps and services I use — in some cases
because Vanessa and I would both want to use them; in some cases because I'm
not comfortable leaving that credential cached on a device I don't keep close
tabs on. So some of the apps I use the most on computers and my phone, and
would potentially use on a tablet, I don't use on the iPad: email, Facebook,
Evernote. The ability to have user accounts or profiles (and have [some apps
available without unlocking an identity, and other apps behind an
identity](http://www.schneier.com/blog/archives/2012/07/all-or-
nothing_1.html)) would make a big difference here; I have to assume this will
happen at some point.

2) typing on any of these onscreen keyboards is frustrating, so I tend to just
wait till I get to a computer for serious input. This hit me when I was
watching my son Dominic learning to crawl: at first he was perfectly happy to
drag himself around on his belly with his arms, his legs trailing behind; as
he got closer to real crawling, he started getting frustrated and impatient
with the previously good-enough belly slide, because he had the yearning for
real speed. So I feel about typing on a tablet: I can do it, and if I were
trapped on another planet with no other means of self-expression I would
surely use it, but if I have thoughts spanning more than a sentence or two,
I'd rather just wait till I get back to a real keyboard to pour them out
effortlessly. (And I realize I can use a separate keyboard with an iPad: it
basically negates this disadvantage, but also the portability advantage vs a
laptop.)

Then, the reasons the Nexus 7 succeeds handsomely at [the modest task that is
its charge](http://bitingtongue.blogspot.com/2012/07/the-simple-task-that-was-
my-charge.html):

3) the form factor. It's significantly more portable, and significantly easier
to hold in one hand; notably this makes it much better for reading on trains
and reading in bed. Given the apps I've already stopped using (due to #1 and
#2), these are the primary ways I want to use a tablet. The iPad's bigger
screen is an advantage, but not enough to make up for the reduced
portability/holdability.

4) while Android as a whole doesn't feel as fluid or natural as iOS, on both
platforms the OS is designed to pretty much get out of the way once you're in
an app; that's to say your real impression of the platform is driven by the
apps. The main apps I use on the Nexus 7 are surprisingly good. The first-
party Google apps (gmail, Google Reader, Google Maps) are better than on iOS;
the builtin Chrome browser is very good; the third party apps I use the most
(Kindle, Instapaper, Evernote, Facebook) are all available and good. So the
overall impression the Nexus 7 leaves is very good.

So, iPad Mini…?

There are warts to Android — even with Jellybean, scrolling and touch
interaction don't feel as smooth as iOS always has. The back button is a
disaster; you never know what it's going to do. The app selection isn't as
wide as iOS, and even where equivalents are available, they're often rougher.
Plus, I've already paid for a fleet of iOS apps. While it's a tradeoff with #4
above, I have a feeling an Apple 7" tablet could be even better than the Nexus
7.

What all this means is that given the way I use a tablet, I find the Nexus 7
does everything I want it to, far cheaper and more portably than the 10" iPad.
I look forward to seeing what Apple does with the rumored iPad Mini (or iPad
Air).

