---
layout: post
title: Swimming upstream
tags:
- diesel
- vw
---
[VW's safety/recall department just sent me these janky
stickers](http://askavwsalesguy.com/blog/2012/07/30/volkswagen-send-tdi-
owners-a-gift.html) for [my 2011 Golf
TDI](http://blog.metamatt.com/blog/2012/03/07/diesel/). The accompanying
notice wasn't phrased as a recall, exactly, but given the return address, I
can't help but think they're trying to avoid liability, and they must be
having a larger than normal problem with people using the wrong fuel.

[![Stickers for VW Golf TDI fuel door](http://farm9.staticflickr.com/8303/7825
635162_89f9e96767.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/67861147@N00/7825635162)

They specially called out loaning the car to friends or family; I haven't had
any problems with borrowers putting in the wrong fuel, but when I have loaned
out the car I've reminded people 3 times that they shouldn't refuel it but if
they do they need to use diesel (the fact the car goes 500 miles between
refueling helps a lot here).

So now my fuel filler area looks like this:

[![VW Golf TDI fuel door after stickers](http://farm9.staticflickr.com/8293/78
25635632_b1431ac662.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/67861147@N00/7825635632
)

(Note how the stickers are wrinkly and poor-fitting, and this isn't only
because I applied them poorly.)

What I don't understand is, why don't they just [use green plastic for the
fuel cap itself](http://forums.tdiclub.com/showthread.php?t=320751)? Not green
as in tree hugger; green as in the color of the handle on almost all diesel
fuel pumps in the US. (I realize the green handle isn't a legal requirement or
a universal convention, and notably BP doesn't follow it, but it's still
pretty widely recognized.) That would be a much more obvious visual cue to
remember which fuel to use. Doesn't this make more sense and look both cleaner
and more obvious?

[![VW TDI fuel door with green aftermarket cap](http://im1.shutterfly.com/medi
a/47a1d831b3127ccefd00a357f97b00000030O08CZtXDdy5ag9vPgo/cC/f=0/ps=50/r=0/rx=7
20/ry=480/)](http://forums.tdiclub.com/showthread.php?t=320751)

I wondered this when I first bought the car; I wonder this every time I refuel
it; I especially wonder this every time I see these stickers.

