---
layout: post
title: Platform preferences and rolling with punches
tags:
- apple
- microsoft
- gadgets
---
When I worked on my high school paper, I spent many hours working on the
newsroom Macs, but I had a Windows machine at home, and I was pretty
comfortable going back and forth. I noticed a few people who had more trouble:
Windows users who would swear a Mac would crash as soon as they touched it,
and symmetrically, Mac users who if using a Windows machine would crash it
right away.

This was in the bad old days of Windows 3.1 and System 7, before MMUs and
memory protection, and crashing neither OS was particularly hard or uncommon.
Still, there seemed to be something to this cross-platform-and-crash
phenomenon. A friend and I came up with a half-serious theory that these
crashes had to do with natural rhythms of human-user activity — mouse and
keyboard input would arrive and trigger interrupts and Mac OS and Windows
might have different preferences for the intervals between these interrupts
where certain rhythms would trigger race conditions just so, and kaboom, while
other rhythms would dance around the same bugs without triggering them. And,
the theory went, people would subconsciously learn what sequences of inputs
would crash their computer, learn to avoid those patterns, and compute along
happily on whichever platform they'd learned to get along with: then upon
trying the other platform, kaboom again.

It was with this in mind that I read [John Moltz's impressions of Microsoft
Surface](http://verynicewebsite.net/2012/10/surface-impressions/). He's
generally pretty fair about giving it a chance, but then he dings it for
screen-rotation flakiness:

> Once when I set it down the screen orientation was upside down and it didn’t
seem to realize it. I had to pick it up and turn it over and then back again
to get it the right way.

I'm sure that happened, but hey, every Apple device with automatic rotation
(iPhone, iPod Touch, iPad) I've ever owned occasionally does that too. Come to
think of it, so do the various digital cameras I've owned (from Canon, Nikon
and Panasonic). I can't think of anything that has a similar feature that I
haven't seen flake out that way.

But maybe if I could just learn to [hold it
right](https://www.google.com/search?q=holding+it+wrong)…

